this show is sponsored by betterhelp
online therapy visit betterhelp.com
padilla because sometimes existing is
exhausting
my name's anthony padilla and today i'll
be spending a day with calvin an ex-cult
member to learn the truth about being
born into a cult alongside his 44
siblings the terrifying red flags that
he started noticing and what it took to
actually escape this cult by the end of
this video we'll find out if it's easy
to reprogram your brain after decades of
severe brainwashing or if the process of
shattering one's entire perception of
the world is outright devastating or
even torturous
[Music]
hello calvin brother so happy to be here
love what you've done with the place
i feel like most people are sympathetic
for people who have been
inside occults but they feel like there
is no way i could ever find myself
within a cult you think that that
sentiment is true saying how could
anybody ever join a cult was like saying
how could anyone ever get in a toxic
relationship nobody
signed up to be in a toxic relationship
that's something that i think is missed
a lot of times is to me the idea of cult
is on a spectrum right and it can shift
it's not until
you can remove yourself from it just
enough to look at it and be like holy
that's not what i want
what was the name of the cult that
you're a part of and what were the core
fundamental beliefs a lot of people have
heard of mormonism there's also what is
known as mormon fundamentalism mormonism
was founded by this guy joseph smith one
of the things that joseph smith was
notorious for is he was a polygamist
there was a small group of people within
the mormon church that felt that
polygamy was a
divine
sacred thing that they should practice
and so they continued to live it and
they lived it privately in this
underground kind of movement that's
where i come from you have to be
connected to your priesthood head your
file leader and be in this bubble and if
you go into the outside world then at
the best you're in danger of losing your
soul and this is very literal this is
not oh yeah a metaphor one of the things
that makes that made it for me
personally so incredibly
challenging is
not wanting to actually be damned to
hell when you imagined leaving you
pictured yourself actually like burning
and potentially yeah because the
question
always would come back to like what if i
leave and i was wrong that i left humans
are storytellers and what makes a good
cult is a really good story with really
great rewards and fantastic really
damning punishments yes exactly so one
of the rewards is if we continue to do
good if we continue to be obedient then
we ourselves
can someday be a god literally you
become a god how
meaningful
that can feel like when you're in that
like i can grow and become this that
sounds so cool and then the other side
because we've been given so much you
will be judged
based on what you're given so you're
either gonna have the kingdom of god and
be amazing
or nothing or worse and that worse is is
eternal pain
and suffering and damnation and cast
into outer darkness one of the most sad
things i i heard when my
grandmother died i heard on her deathbed
she was
saying i hope i was good enough i hope i
was good enough and for your entire life
to yeah come down to that moment
of just reflecting and hoping that you
did yeah i hope i did enough like i have
to earn this and i have to strive so
much and i could strive so much
and work so hard and not just not know
still falls short seeing my grandmother
get to that place and like get to the
end of her life and then be
be feeling that way about herself was it
was sad
so how many siblings did you have
do you have i have 44 siblings i have
more siblings
than there are days in the month
you had more siblings than there were
presidents for a while holy
you're right i have another one when i
posted the community tab post for this
asking for questions most people are
curious about this idea of living
in a community of siblings 45 siblings
under one roof can you tell me a little
about what that life was like it's
normal how do we form normal we form
normal by what we are familiar with it's
all i knew now on the other side of that
like it was just fun typical day was
getting up at 6am and going and milking
the cow and weeding your section of the
garden playing basketball just living
life right it looks like you're looking
back fondly about those memories yeah no
they were amazing things like the very
best thing was
how many siblings i had when you have as
many siblings as we had it was almost
like even our family we formed clicks
i can't imagine there's the cool
siblings
what was your relationship like with
your parents this culture particularly
is incredibly patriarchal because the
dad is your connection to priesthood and
so your dad is there for the connection
to god bingo when you're in a culture
like that you have to like be passed off
by your death then it became less
like dad child and way more authority
follower can you get into
what your dynamic was like with your
moms i have four moms four months by the
way if you do some math my moms are
freaking troop like 12
13 kids each you were surrounded by
multiple figures that could give you
love multiple motherly figures that
could give you love we were very much
trained and conditioned these are your
moms my dad hated the concept of of
favoritism or using his word
interestingly enough it's his pet word
is monogamy like monogamy is like a
curse word in that culture you're gonna
go do something with one of your own
blood siblings that sounds so self that
sounds so monogamous you weren't trapped
within a community you could go out and
eat at restaurants and whatnot we did
that almost zero who has the authority
to speak truth the priesthood
where's the priesthood
right here if you want truth
why would you go outside of this how did
you know which mom was yours if you were
never outright told because the birth
mom is going to take care of her kids
like
human the
yeah yeah i can remember stuff when i
could when i was crawling i remember
getting my diaper changed
that is a foreign concept i remember my
mom put me in the crib and stuff like
that don't remember her nursing thank
goodness
don't remember that no suckling memories
that's probably good i love you mom but
glad i don't have that one
do you think that there's anything
intrinsically wrong with polygamy no we
felt persecuted from the outside world
for generations on just that one idea so
if anybody wants to have any combination
of relationship
no like i have no view on it
where i draw a line when there are high
stakes if you don't where you no longer
have free choice and not choice like you
can choose the good path and go to
heaven or you can choose the bad choice
and go to hell choice is yours
freedom
you can choose
despite being born into a cult do you
feel
like your parents were well intentioned
one million so you don't blame them for
any of the behaviors that went on well
sometimes humans do really
stupid things and
painful things
overall yeah my parents and and then a
lot of people that come from a culture
like mine absolutely well intentioned
doing it in the name of of righteousness
the problem with that is
righteousness can replace love a memory
that comes to me often
whenever i get to this place is just
like any little kid
[Music]
your dad is your hero
yeah you know of course you don't talk
yeah no no no i i it's a great question
it needs to be talked about it was right
after one of my little
siblings was born he was in the hospital
a long time because he was premature and
it was a big thing that he's finally
home and the family was so happy and
there was
a sunday morning my mom was getting
ready who delivered this baby a couple
months prior and
my dad came in gave me my little brother
who was born and i just remember
thinking that this was such a beautiful
moment like i remember feeling so lucky
and then i looked up and noticed that
the energy shifted between my mom and my
dad
and then i watched my dad hit my mom
and what was going on through your mind
at that moment confusion
yeah
even as a young person
like you
you're trained to
like
try to compartmentalize it or just
don't just throw it away and that was
just so confusing and what made it even
more confusing after freezing
i i
started
just screaming and bawling and my dad
came over and gave me a hug and said hey
you're okay you're okay and went and
took me to get ice cream and stuff like
that and life continues on it's how it
can become so toxic because
it's not always bad and that's what
covers up the it's just too easy
that if they're a male and they hold the
priesthood forgive them and all this
state statements that are ignoring the
victim let this go so because it's just
holding on to you and all the while
silent suffering happens it's not fair
did any part of that
strike you was odd or make you question
or sit in your head in a way that made
you be like i don't know if i could
trust any of this that was enough
to be like that can't that can't be cool
but i remember even questioning hmm i
wonder what my mom must have done to
deserve that you're almost taught to
victim blame if you rile somebody up
that has a an authority position then
it's usually like
you're the one in the wrong
did anyone ever tell you that you were
brainwashed no in fact you're always
looking at the outside world and seeing
why they're wrong you know the truth
yeah we know the truth we're so lucky
we're so lucky we need to pray at night
and day that we got to be born into this
i'm assuming there are lots of people
watching right now who are thinking that
isn't that doesn't sound like a cult
that sounds like just a strict religion
things usually don't start out as a cult
they started out as a beautiful mission
a beautiful value system a cult is like
a
dis a disintegration a degradation of
something that was once good and
as it continued on control became more
centralized the in-group out-group
dynamic got stronger the stakes for
leaving got strong got more harsh
and the potential rewards for staying in
usually greater and that's what can
create
what we call cold
was there a key moment
when you realize that you really had to
break down your entire belief system i
asked if i could go to college i
remember the first conversation i had
with my dad that i wanted to go to
college like if you want to continue to
grow and learn and have knowledge why
would you go to college it's like so i
can learn stuff but i just answered the
question yeah he would say not stuff
that was that would help you achieve
salvation the main point as to why
it's very rare in my family is you are
at risk of losing your soul if you go to
college because you will be among
the others so you could be
what converted and brainwashed into the
outside world bingo you could lose your
way how did you convince them i just
went to a meeting with my grandfather
yeah and he's like what do you want to
go for and i said business and he
thought about it and he's like you know
what that's probably a good idea because
we have so many people that are in
construction and some plumbers and
electricians we don't really have
anybody that ha that knows business so
it was basically going for the community
and you were being very honest you did
want to come back and be the total
person yeah and you have to take general
education yeah and so one of the classes
i took was a philosophy class i can just
see how this all goes south philosophy
oh dude this class was so cool because
she the entire semester was themed off
of the matrix i'm sure there are lots of
parallels that you uh started to notice
the matrix was
based on an
actually a really old story plato's
allegory of the cave there are these
people inside of a cave and they've been
there in their entire life all of a
sudden on this wall in front of them
these shadows appear and they make
meaning as to what these shadows are and
it's everything that they just they just
love it like when they see the shadows
on their wall they're like this is
heaven like they discuss it they argue
like the shadows are their reality one
day one of the
people in plato's story breaks loose
from the chains and he noticed that
there's a back wall and so he walks to
the back of the cave and looks behind
the wall and he sees that the shadows
are being created by someone holding up
some shape in front of a flame
everything in this person's life comes
into question because the shadows that
he thought were real are just a
projection of something else and then he
sees a crack in the wall and climbs out
and goes out of the cave so let's say he
saw a shadow of a tree then he goes out
and he sees a real tree his mind is
blown literally his entire identity and
everything just became
shattered because everything he thought
he knew was not true and it scared him
and
after it scared him he then was like
this is awesome there's
there's so much more to life but i still
have
friends and family
down there they need to know about this
so he goes back to
the cave he can't see very well he
stumbles and so people like hey like
where have you been he was like oh let
me tell you like there's this whole
outside world that's crazy and of course
they have no frame of reference
so what do they think he's gone crazy
but what could be better than the
shadows that we have they ask him don't
you understand what i'm trying to say
what i've seen these shadows are nothing
compared to what's real and what's out
there now they feel threatened what are
you saying are you trying to take away
our shadows and so because they feel
threatened they kill them
after my professor tells us that story i
thought of everything i knew to be true
holy
there wasn't a single thing
not a single thing that was like a core
thing
that i had internally discovered
it was from
my dad or the other priesthood leaders
the church it was the first thing that
was like what i call the crack that was
the thing that was so incredibly
unsettling i couldn't say for certain
why what i believed was actually worth
believing in did you feel like every
like your eyes were open like everything
around you looked different that was the
beginning point that casted doubt i
didn't say that this is wrong i was like
i said i hope it's still true you hope
that everything that you that i
developed your life yes is real i hope
it's real
so what it did is it put me in
an intense study mode curiosity mode and
i was like if it is true
then i'll find it outside of this then
where it really blew wide open
is when i left the bubble i left my
small town in utah i went to
an event i shared it in this intimate
group of people i'm starting to doubt my
entire
entire reality and one of the people
asked what happens to people if they're
wrong like and he had me describe hell
to him and then he says kind of seems
like that's what you feel like right now
he made me see that i was living i was
agonizing almost in a hell-like way now
and we're feeling internally what you
described as an external thing and so
all those pieces is what it came
together finding things that are true
like so much and that's what led to this
this moment
where i realized i don't believe this
anymore you actually have a voice memo
that you recorded that that very
specific moment when you did completely
deconstruct it the day i decided yeah
can you play that for us
sure before we continue learning about
the world of escaping a cult i don't
think i am going to stay
i don't think i'm going to stay in the
work i just wanted to take a quick
moment to see how you're all feeling
about these one-on-one interviews that
i've been doing a little bit more often
that allow us to really
go
way more in depth into some of these
stories that i feel really require that
extra time the standard format that you
already love for the series is not going
away though we'll be back next week with
i spent a day with aromantics with three
guests as usual i'm really enjoying it
but it's not all about me i want to know
what you think leave a comment below and
i'd like to thank honey for their
continued support in sponsoring this
series and allowing us to explore some
of these deeper topics honey is the free
browser extension that scours the
internet for promo codes and applies the
best one it finds to your cart so you
don't have to sit there at checkout
wondering if you could be saving a ton
of money because if honey finds a
working coupon a honey button drops down
and all you have to do is click apply
coupon honey supports over 30 000 stores
online from tech to popular fashion
brands and food delivery so you're
pretty much set with whatever it is that
you buy online i won't ask honey has
saved me a silly amount of money with my
online purchases like the yerba mate i
downed last night that pumped caffeine
through my veins and allowed me to stay
up until 4am doing research for this
episode it was a great time did i
mention that honey is literally free yes
but i had to say it again and it felt
good to say it again and it installs in
just a few seconds so if you want to do
yourself a solid and also support this
series i appreciate it get honey for
free at joinhoney.com
padilla again it's free and if you go to
joinhoney.com padilla you'll be directly
supporting this series now back to the
world of escaping a cult as i record
this i'm here in my apartment in
centennial park arizona what i'm doing
is reflecting on what what i really want
is whether or not i'm going to stay
with
the community
the
family with
the religion
that i've been a part of for the last 29
plus years and the thing
that
i think i'm concluding to
the thing that i haven't ever recorded
on anyway that i think i'm gonna say it
here i don't think i am going to stay
i don't think i'm going to stay
in the work
the work is
what the religion is called when i sit
with myself and i imagine myself
five years down the road ten years down
the road and staying it just doesn't
feel
right i have to believe that if this
place if this religion is the one true
place god's place if i was removed from
it i would be able to find it but all
these people searching for truth
how many of them have found the work
really really really really small in
fact when i look at the work and the
religion
who's in it
who's in it are people that have been in
it
they've been born into it it's a bunch
of the same family
that's a red flag to me and so what i'm
documenting to myself and i guess just
having the courage to say to myself out
loud
is
it's a matter of time
i'm leaving the work and that's when you
actually say it
as awesome yeah i can see i can see the
goosebumps how does it feel hearing that
back so freaking proud
can you hear everything all the the
process of what you're doing the wheels
i'm hearing the wheels turning and stuff
like that because i'm hearing myself
come to
things that based on my own life
experiences going out into the world and
meeting with people and stuff like that
coming to a belief system that is mine
not what somebody else taught me and i
might even be wrong yeah yeah and be
okay
with
i would rather choose this and go to
hell if that's what it meant
then
believe in this other stuff
that just doesn't make any goddamn sense
to me you can kind of hear how long it
takes you to
say it because
you feel it
you know it's there it's like on the tip
of your tongue but you're just you're
almost
afraid of letting the words come out of
your mouth if you say it you can't take
it back you better be ready it was still
a couple of months till i tell i told
people you really had to come to terms
with it yeah i had to come terms with
myself the biggest uh one that i was
worried about telling was my dad it was
incredibly agonizing i just felt that it
was going to wreck him i went over to
his house and
said can we have a conversation i went
up to his room and told him and did he
know before you told him no
and i just and i just told him and yeah
and it broke him and he asked me why and
tried to talk me out of it and i was
just like no i'm done i'm out what's the
energy in the room like friend because
telling my dad was the beginning of me
be truly being my own independent self
that's not tied to some external source
telling me how i should think act or
behave
now that you've been through that and
you have that entire world to reflect on
where else do you feel like this
cult-like behavior exists in everyday
life wherever you see community and
where it can start to turn into
something not so good as if you start to
say we're all amazing and you're
invalidating the other groups outside of
you and then where
you start to elevate some centralized
authority yeah then it can become
incredibly cult-like it could be applied
to anything relationships even on a
one-on-one it could be that way the
whole relationship thing especially
comparing it to a toxic relationship
it feels like the stakes are high either
either way yeah i feel like it exists
around us everywhere whether it's
politics or
nationalism or capitalism here's another
rule of cult you only can see it from
the outside so how do you know you're
not inside one are you nervous at all
about showing your face on camera to
potentially millions of people knowing
that
members from your colts
who are still there even your family
could see it i'm more comfortable in my
own skin than i've literally ever been
and if they if somebody is offended
cool like that's part of life anyway
you're going to offend someone about
yeah the more if i'm gonna have that
anyway and if it can potentially help
somebody or give somebody else empathy
whether inside or outside i i think i
used to be but i am more comfortable
with that than i've ever been if there
is anyone
from
your past your family your religion your
church that is watching that stumbled
upon this video is there anything that
you want to say to them well the one
thing we know for sure is we've got this
this
one
life this is our
life to live
really really sit with yourself and see
if this is coming from you something
that you would choose if you were on
neutral footing would you choose the
life you have now or was it just given
as long as you're doing what you want to
do and you truly feel that you are happy
and it's leading to deeper happiness do
you boo what do you think is the biggest
misconception about colts in general
people that are in them
must just be brainwashed and i think
it's a very
sobering and humbling thought when you
really see the psychological
things at play that you're like huh
like maybe i could and actually be
careful and question and look around i
see certain things like even people
putting like a decal on their car i'm
like that person believes so strongly
about whatever that is whether it be the
american flag the darwin fish that
whatever it is that is the type of
person that
maybe doesn't really question think
outside they're just like this is the
way it is a mind full of conclusion has
no room for expansion and that's what
you just have to be careful with it
doesn't mean you can't have any strong
foundation or footing of things that you
believe if those beliefs are serving you
but i think what's helpful is
be open-minded enough
that it's not a full stop alright you
got five seconds to shout out or promote
anything you want directly in the camera
go i just wrote my first children's book
dedicated to my daughter belle mistakes
are a-okay maggie may you can go
pre-order it now go to calvinwoman.com
forward slash book is this your first
video haven't you seen these videos
they're fantastic
if you're not subscribed what are you
doing what are you doing with your life
you are so much goodness look at this
look at this this stage there's so much
you cannot see well there you have it i
spent a day with calvin an ex-cult
member and i feel like i understand the
way
that it it feels to be on the inside of
a colts at least a little bit better and
it might seem obvious to people on the
outside of a belief system that
something is very wrong but it is not so
easy for anyone experiencing it from the
inside and i think this actually applies
to way more things in all of our lives
than we might even realize
and i commend calvin's courage for
reliving these traumatizing experiences
on a platform with potentially millions
of viewers so we can all learn something
deeper and hopefully find a way to apply
it to ourselves
in the process
[Music]
yeah i grew up on a farm so yeah yeah
small family farm small family well
touche brother touched a small family
farm or small family farm small farm big
family so the name of a hit tlc tv show